---
layout: post
title: "More Thoughts on Coronavirus"
date: 2020-04-02
---

A week following my [first post](https://robinzxu.github.io/blog/2020/03/24/thoughts-on-coronavirus){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"} regarding COVID-19, here are four more thoughts on the situation.

1. **Zhao Lijian might end up being the most influential person you've never heard of**  
Zhao Lijian is a spokesperson for the Chinese Foreign Ministry Information Department. He is also an unbridled Twitter fiend whose recent conspiratorial [claims](https://twitter.com/zlj517/status/1238111898828066823){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"} that the US military planted COVID-19 in China have done more to poison the well of US-China relations than any other single act I can think of in recent memory. Zhao Lijian may argue that his tweets were simply a response to the asinine claims by Senator Tom Cotton that COVID-19 was a Chinese bioweapon, or Representative Jim Banks' calls for reparations. But I still can't figure out what he was trying to accomplish. He wasn't seeking to play to his home audience. After all, he made his post in English on Twitter. Was he trying to win over Westerners tired of the Trump administration to his side? He shouldn't have tried given how united all parts of the US political spectrum have become on issues regarding China. And he wasn't simply parroting his higher ups either. Cui Tiankai, China's ambassador to the US, has publicly [come out](https://www.axios.com/china-coronavirus-ambassador-cui-tiankai-1b0404e8-026d-4b7d-8290-98076f95df14.html){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}  against his conspiracies. Whatever his motive, he has given away any goodwill China earned through its successful containment of COVID-19, provisions of supplies to other countries, and moves to position itself as the adult in the room vis-à-vis the US. This incident will only serve to harden the stance of China hawks who are increasingly growing in number and influence. I expect the trade and media wars to intensify substantially following this pandemic.

2. **Adam Neumann and WeWork will be remembered as emblematic of the fall of Silicon Valley over the last decade**  
I know, I know. WeWork and Adam Neumann are based in New York, and Silicon Valley companies have been soaring in recent years, with Amazon, Apple, Alphabet, and Microsoft all becoming trillion dollar companies. But what I mean by Silicon Valley's "fall" is its loss of moral standing and decline in the eyes of public over the last decade. Technology companies started off the decade strong by stepping into the shoes of financiers who had been pantsed by the Great Recession. It was refreshing to see the development of a new industry that promised genuine value add and boasted mottos like, "Don't be evil". But as technology companies have gained in power and pervasiveness, it has become increasingly clear that they can be just as parasitic as the industries which previously held the limelight. Facebook's failures to prevent electioneering, Amazon's harsh working conditions, Uber's harassment scandals and abuse of gig workers... hardly a week goes by without these or similar issues hitting the headlines. However, it was Adam Neumann's WeWork, in my opinion, which has been best able to capture that magical combination of incompetence and grift which makes companies so easy to hate. Here was a firm which was somehow valued at [$47bn](https://www.cnbc.com/2019/10/22/wework-47-billion-valuation-softbank-fiction.html){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"} despite its product being clearly unsustainable and its founder clearly incompetent. And even with the collapse of its IPO (and likely the entire company now that COVID-19 has appeared), Adam Neumann was still to receive a payout of [$1.7bn](https://www.vox.com/recode/2019/10/22/20927188/wework-adam-neumann-payout-softbank-layoffs){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}. It feels a lot like the golden parachutes everyone was so angry about a decade ago. 

3. **This recovery will take a while**  
I still hear lots of folks saying that the economy will recover quickly once the virus disappears because we don't have the same systematic weaknesses as existed back in 2007. I'm not so optimistic. First, what does it even mean to say, "once the virus disappears"? The stage of the disease has been highly variable across different countries, and even between different regions within the same country. Even if California or Washington happen to control the virus, that doesn't mean that they can simply go back to business as usual because it'll probably still be spreading in states further behind the curve, like Texas and Florida. The virus will probably also continue to spread in countries which saw later outbreaks or have lesser capacity to control its growth. I think it's probable that we'll see continued travel restrictions, in addition to rolling lockdowns, for the next year or so. Prior employment numbers are also unlikely to return. Many businesses will fail as lockdown measures are extended, meaning that there wont be jobs for people to immediately return to. Other businesses which successfully navigate this crisis with reduced staff counts or work-from-home measures will realise that they were previously overstaffed; COVID-19 could be a good excuse for them to finally cut unnecessary workers. And even once this current wave of COVID-19 has passed, there will be many employers out there who will remain wary of second or third waves. I don't see businesses rushing to make new investments or hire back all of their old employees if they fear that they may have to repeat their cost cutting measures in a month or two.

4. **Reusable masks are desperately needed**  
It's become quite clear that it would be nearly impossible for any hospital, city, or country to stockpile enough surgical masks and respirators for a real pandemic. Surgical masks are meant to be changed between patients, and respirators become difficult to breathe through after 3-4 hours as their filters become clogged. This means that for a city of Singapore's size (5.8 million people), 10-20 million masks might be needed every day if proper usage were to be maintained. So why hasn't there been a bigger push towards producing reusable alternatives so that people don't have to jerry-rig their own out of rubber bands and t-shirts? Washable cloth masks with a hydrophobic layer, similar to what can be found in disposable three-layer surgical masks, should be provided to the general public so that disease transmission rates and hoarding behaviour are reduced. Respirators should be constructed with robust, reusable bodies so that authorities could stockpile just their filters instead. It's not clear to me why the bodies of many respirators have to be made with paperboard or other disposable materials since these sections are not meant to be permeable anyway. The filters on these respirators take up only a small proportion of their total volume, so just storing filters would be substantially more feasible than storing whole masks. All of these steps could be taken with existing technology and would reduce the burden of stockpiling by an order of magnitude, if not more. 