---
layout: post
title: "The Cost of Overreaction"
date: 2020-02-20
---

It\'s been nearly three months now since COVID-19 first appeared in Wuhan and the global response has been aggressive. At the time of writing, some 77 million people in China have been placed under lockdown, a number which taken alone would represent the world\'s 20th largest population (between Germany and Thailand). Numerous countries and airlines have suspended travel from China, cruise ships have been denied port access, and Hongkongers have turned to [armed robbery](https://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/law-and-crime/article/3050907/armed-gang-steals-hk1000-toilet-paper-coronavirus){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"} in the search for toilet paper.

Strict government action may seem sensible in light of the fact that COVID-19 has already claimed over 2,200 lives and infected some 78,000 people. But given the highly contagious nature of the disease and its relatively low mortality rate, many of these measures may ultimately prove to be futile and do more harm than good. While it\'s still far too early to tell the ultimate economic impact of the virus, [early estimates](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/feb/19/coronavirus-could-cost-global-economy-1tn-in-lost-output){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"} suggest that factory shutdowns, lower consumption, and decreased travel may lead to a decline in global growth of up to 1.3% in 2020. That\'s equivalent to $1.1tn in lost income.

It\'s impossible to know how many more ([or less!](https://medium.com/@indica/how-japan-made-covid-19-worse-c97180df9c95){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}) infections and deaths the disease may have caused were the response not as forceful, or what the economic impact would have been in that scenario. However, it\'s almost certainly the case that [bumbling government action](https://edition.cnn.com/asia/live-news/coronavirus-outbreak-01-28-20-intl-hnk/h_de6f7529da8c257da95ca55439097408){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"} has stoked public fear and hysteria, contributing to the economic disruption. Travel restrictions and general paranoia have severely disrupted supply chains and work arrangements, placing businesses at risk of failing and workers at risk of losing their jobs. Such circumstances have a real impact on people\'s lives and ought to be carefully weighed against the urge to preserve public health at all costs.

I won\'t speculate here as to how we should measure the pecuniary value of a human life; different countries and organisations already have [many](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/psb.1562){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"} [ways](https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2017-value-of-life/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"} of doing it. But if we divide $1.1tn by the EPA\'s estimate of roughly $10mm (which is specific to the US and on the higher end anyway), that would be equal to 110,000 lives. Let\'s say that only 20% of the economic impact could have been avoided through less strident controls. That would still imply an economic cost roughly equal to 22,000 lives. A relaxation of controls would have to kill ten times the number of people who have already died before the human cost outweighs the economic gain.

Of course, the maths above is almost certainly wrong and the full impact of COVID-19, even with the measures in place, is yet to be felt. Many political leaders may also have felt compelled to respond overly aggressively to the virus in order to placate a public driven to frenzy by social media disinformation. Setting aside these limitations, however, I feel that the economic costs of quarantine have now grown large enough that a serious examination of how we ought to address such scenarios in the future is warranted. A more nuanced response to a disease which has only exhibited flu-like mortality outside of Wuhan could have spared the world economy much of the damage it is now facing, in addition to limiting the [racism](https://theconversation.com/coronavirus-the-latest-disease-to-fuel-mistrust-fear-and-racism-130853){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"} and paranoia that has become increasingly common. 
