---
layout: post
title: "Thoughts on Coronavirus"
date: 2020-03-24
---

It's been nearly four months now since COVID-19 first appeared in Wuhan. At the time of writing, roughly 435,000 cases have been officially recorded, along with 20,000 deaths. Global travel has ground to a halt as countries close their borders, cruise ships have been denied port access, and Hongkongers (among others) have turned to [armed robbery](https://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/law-and-crime/article/3050907/armed-gang-steals-hk1000-toilet-paper-coronavirus){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"} in the search for toilet paper. But even after all this, the magnitude of the situation seems to have escaped a good number of people. [Spring breakers](https://www.usatoday.com/story/travel/destinations/2020/03/19/spring-break-beaches-florida-look-packed-despite-coronavirus-spread/2873248001/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"} are still partying hard, Californians are [crowding the trailheads](https://www.wsj.com/articles/no-californians-sheltering-in-place-doesnt-include-hiking-in-crowds-11585065557){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}, and Donald Trump has seemingly [given up](https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1241935285916782593/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"} (not that he was trying in the first place). Here are six quick thoughts on the COVID-19 situation up to this point.

1. **We should've seen this coming**  
Governments and individuals were largely oblivious to the dangers of COVID-19 long after the situation had proven itself to be severe in China. Wuhan was placed under effective quarantine on 23 January, followed by 18 other Chinese cities by 25 January. This clearly extreme response should've signalled the severity of the situation, but overseas stock prices continued their relentless climb upwards (the S&P 500 reached an all-time high on 19 February) and foreign governments did little to prepare for the inevitable (as evidenced by the complete debacle of a response once COVID-19 reached the US and Europe). It's all incredibly absurd in retrospect. I've heard lots of people say that the situation is overblown given that things like the flu and car accidents also kill many people each year, but this take ignores the uncertainty surrounding COVID-19 and the wide cone of potential outcomes. Even now, we still do not have a complete picture of COVID-19's mortality rate, reproduction number, comorbidities, or potential for reinfection. We had even less information two months ago. Don't treat COVID-19 like you would car accidents; car accidents don't have the potential for exponential growth, while this certainly does.

2. **The concept of "Fed Ammunition" might revolve more around the action of cutting rather than the interest rate itself**  
The idea that the Fed "expends ammunition" when it cuts interest rates has always been a bit confusing to me. Assuming that the new rate is maintained, whether or not a cut happens sooner rather than later has no impact on target rates in the future. Rates would still be the same in week three, regardless of the whether the cut was made in week one or week two. So if we insist on sticking with the "ammunition" analogy, I think it would be more appropriate to say that the Fed can no longer increase its "rate of fire". However, the market response to the Fed's two inter-meeting cuts in March has made me reconsider this a bit. It may be that much of the impact of a Fed cut actually stems from the psychology of *seeing* a cut and knowing that the government is acting to ameliorate the situation. Investor sentiment could actually decline once the zero lower bound is reached and it becomes clear that no future cuts are coming.

3. **US fracking companies will have a hard time starting up again**  
Saudi Arabia's decision to kick-off an oil price war with Russia, coupled with the steep drop in demand due to COVID-19, could prove to be a fatal blow to the US oil & gas industry, barring any government intervention. Most shale drillers are thought to have breakeven prices in the $40 to $60 dollar range, and even then, many have raised [doubts](https://www.desmogblog.com/finances-fracking-shale-industry-drills-more-debt-profit){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"} about the true profitability of the industry due to steep decline curves. It is true that while fracking companies may go bankrupt in the short-run, their techniques and the Texas oil patch will remain, waiting for the next boom. However, getting lenders to back such projects in the future is going to be a much harder sell now that everyone knows that MBS could kill the sector at the drop of a hat. Don't be surprised if prices remain low for a while. High oil prices only increase the competitiveness of renewable energy sources; if Saudi Arabia isn't careful, they may be left with a sizeable reserve by the time the rest of the world moves on to alternative energies. Better for them to sell what they can before that happens.

4. **This could be the US' "Suez Moment"**  
Eastern countries have almost universally managed the crisis better
